MAINTENANCE_MODE(1)                 RSpade Manual                 MAINTENANCE_MODE(1)

NAME
    maintenance_mode - take the application down for maintenance: 503 the web, refuse the
    automated task runners, and stop the runtime services

SYNOPSIS
    php artisan rsx:maintenance:enable [--reason=<text>] [--no-services]
    php artisan rsx:maintenance:disable [--no-services] [--force]

DESCRIPTION
    Maintenance mode is ONE flag file with two ways in: the operator commands above, and
    rsx:framework:pull, which raises the same window around the destructive part of an update
    with the reason "framework update in progress". Same mechanism, same script, different
    reason - there is no second maintenance system to learn.

        storage/rsx-framework/.maintenance.mode.framework.update

    The flag lives under storage/ (the tamper gate skips it and rsx:clean preserves it, so it
    can never itself trip a verify finding). Its CONTENT is the operator REASON, quoted by the
    web 503 body and by every CLI refusal.

    Both commands are intercepted PRE-BOOT in system/artisan and shelled straight to
    system/bin/maintenance-mode.sh - exactly like rsx:framework:pull. Consequences worth
    knowing: they work on a broken or half-synced tree, they can never be refused by the gate
    they control, and they appear in no `php artisan list` output (there is no Laravel command
    behind them). Both are IDEMPOTENT.

WHAT ENABLE DOES (in order - the order is load-bearing)
    1. Write the flag, with the reason as its content. FIRST, before anything stops: a process
       booting into the window must already SEE maintenance mode, or it would select the live
       backends (cluster locks over rsx-lockd, the Redis cache) and hard-fatal on the refused
       connect.
    2. rsx:tasks:kill-all - force-kill running background tasks (SIGTERM, 5s grace, SIGKILL).
       Best-effort: a pre-database or broken tree must not fail the transition.
    3. Quiesce the node RPC helper daemons - every node process whose command line names a
       socket under storage/rsx-tmp/ (the six build helpers plus ssr-server): SIGTERM, one
       settle pass, SIGKILL, with one line reporting the count. Pure bash, so it works on a
       broken tree. This is the twin of Rpc_Client_Abstract::quiesce_all(), which rsx:clean
       calls; see WHY THE RPC DAEMONS ARE A SPECIAL CASE below.
    4. supervisorctl stop, in this order: realtime, fpc-proxy, php-fpm, rsx-lockd, and redis
       LAST. The lock daemon stops AFTER its PHP consumers, so no live request loses a lock
       out from under itself.

    Steps 2-4 are the SERVICES half: --no-services performs step 1 only.

    Every supervisor call is best-effort and matched by NAME PREFIX (realtime*, fpc*,
    php-fpm*, rsx-lockd*, redis*). A host without supervisorctl, or without one of those
    programs, simply skips that unit - maintenance mode still works, it just controls nothing.

WHAT DISABLE DOES
    0. REFUSE if the repository has unmerged paths (unless --force). See below.
    1. supervisorctl start, in the reverse order: redis FIRST (everything else expects it),
       then rsx-lockd, then php-fpm, realtime, fpc-proxy.
    1a. WAIT FOR rsx-lockd TO ANSWER before starting php-fpm. Spawning is not readiness:
       `supervisorctl start` confirms a process exists, never that it is serving, and a
       request that takes a cluster lock against a daemon which is not yet listening waits
       with NO deadline and NO error - "the site is slow", nothing in any log. The probe is
       the protocol's own `ping`, which the daemon answers PRE-HELLO precisely so a bare,
       freshly-started instance can prove it is serving. Endpoint comes from .env
       (LOCK_SERVER_HOST / LOCK_SERVER_PORT) via bash /dev/tcp, so the probe needs no
       Laravel and still works on a broken tree. A box with no rsx-lockd unit skips it.

       NO TIMEOUT: it waits as long as the daemon takes, saying so every 5s and naming what
       it is waiting for. That is deliberate - a visible "still waiting for rsx-lockd" is
       better than a silent deadline that admits traffic to a daemon which never came up.
       Ctrl-C is always available; the flag stays raised, so nothing is half-open.
    2. Remove the flag - LAST, so nothing serves before its services are back.

    Disable is STATELESS: it starts whichever of the five units exist, with no record of what
    enable stopped. A unit an operator had deliberately stopped beforehand will therefore be
    started. That is accepted and deliberate - determinism beats a state file that can go stale.

WHY THE RPC DAEMONS ARE A SPECIAL CASE
    The node build helpers (js-parser, js-transformer, minify, jqhtml-compile, js-sanitizer,
    js-code-quality) and ssr-server are NOT supervised. They are spawned on demand by whatever
    PHP process first needs one, and then abandoned - the kernel reparents them to PID 1. So
    no supervisorctl stop reaches them: stopping php-fpm takes down the workers, never the
    daemons those workers left behind. Each one took its socket path as an argv argument at
    spawn time and never reconsiders it, which is also the only handle that works:

        pgrep -f -- '--socket=<storage>/rsx-tmp/'

    They must go down with everything else because a maintenance window is, by definition, the
    moment the code under them changes - a framework update rewrites the server scripts, and
    rsx:git's tree-rewriting ops enter through this same script. A daemon that survives keeps
    serving the code it was started with.

    DISABLE DOES NOT RESTART THEM, deliberately. They hold no state and the next process that
    needs one spawns it on demand; that is the contract, and it is what guarantees the
    post-window daemon is running post-window code. Belt and braces: the client also records
    the sha1 of the server script it spawned in <socket>.meta and refuses to reuse a daemon
    whose provenance no longer matches (rsx:man storage_directories).

THE CONFLICT GUARD ON DISABLE
    Disable refuses while the repository has UNMERGED index entries, listing them and naming
    --force. Bringing services up over a half-merged tree serves broken code.

    This is also the mechanism that holds rsx:git's app-conflict halt in place. When
    `php artisan rsx:git pull` (or merge/rebase) hits a conflict in APP files, it stops and
    deliberately leaves this window UP so the merge can be resolved with no traffic. One guard
    serves both the manual operator and the proxy - there is no second, parallel rule.

        <resolve the conflicted files>
        php artisan rsx:git commit
        php artisan rsx:maintenance:disable

    Only unmerged entries block: a merge that is resolved but not yet committed passes. An
    in-progress merge is not itself a refusal. --no-services is unaffected by the guard (it
    starts nothing), but it still clears the flag, so it is not a way around it.

THE CLI GATE (allow-most-deny-some)
    The gate exists to stop AUTOMATED processes - the cron tick, task workers, web traffic -
    from firing into a stopped environment. It is NOT there to babysit humans, who are
    presumed to know they turned maintenance on.

        BLOCKED                rsx:task:process, rsx:task:worker
        BLOCKED unless --force rsx:task:run
        ALLOWED                everything else - migrate, rsx:health, rsx:clean, rsx:check,
                               builds, rsx:man, ...
        BYPASSES the gate      any command carrying --_framework-update-override (the pull's
                               own sub-calls)

    Refusals exit 75 and always name both the reason and the way out:

        503 - System is in maintenance mode (db surgery); background task runners are blocked.
        Exit maintenance mode: php artisan rsx:maintenance:disable

    The classification is pre-boot and autoload-free (system/artisan), so it holds even when
    vendor/ is half-synced.

WEB
    Every request answers 503 with Retry-After: 120 and a plain-text body quoting the reason
    (system/public/index.php, before Composer's autoloader). The IDE bridge (/_ide/service/*)
    is intentionally exempt - the editor keeps working during maintenance.

    CAVEAT worth knowing: once enable has STOPPED php-fpm, no PHP runs at all, so the web
    server answers with its own upstream error (nginx: 502 Bad Gateway) instead of the
    framework's 503. The 503 gate is what covers the window where PHP still runs - the
    instant between raising the flag and stopping php-fpm, a host whose php-fpm is not
    supervised, and `--no-services`. Both are "the app is down"; only one of them can carry
    your reason string. Put a friendly maintenance page in front of your reverse proxy if
    that distinction matters to your users.

RSPADE_MAINT_MODE (the per-process snapshot)
    Both entrypoints define the constant RSPADE_MAINT_MODE from ONE filesystem stat at boot,
    and Framework_Maintenance::is_active() answers from it. Consumers therefore never observe
    the flag flipping mid-process - which matters most for the lock backend, since a lock must
    be released through the same backend that granted it.

        Framework_Maintenance::is_active()          the snapshot (what consumers use)
        Framework_Maintenance::is_active_on_disk()  the live view (failure-path re-check)
        Framework_Maintenance::reason()             the flag's content
        Framework_Maintenance::$force_active_for_tests   PHP-test seam (true|false|null)

WHAT CHANGES WHILE SERVICES ARE STOPPED
    Locks. rsx-lockd is stopped, and a CLUSTER lock is granted as a NO-OP for the duration
    (owner ruling 2026-08-11): a `maint:` token, granted instantly, holding nothing, touching
    no file, waiting for no one. That is not a shortcut - it is what the window means. A lock
    exists to exclude a concurrent writer, and maintenance has already removed every one of
    them: web requests are 503, the task runners are refused, the background workers are
    killed.

    It USED to degrade to the flock backend, on the reasoning that a single-box lock is
    equivalent to a cluster-wide one once the fleet is down. True, and beside the point: it
    bought exclusion against a peer maintenance had already removed, and it cost real
    contention against php-fpm during rsx:debug and similar work.

    SYSTEM locks are untouched and still flock - their contenders (a concurrent artisan
    command, a lingering worker) are exactly what maintenance does NOT stop, and a SYSTEM lock
    can still wait and still time out with the canonical message ("Failed to acquire {type}
    lock for {domain}:{name} after {timeout} seconds") that the updater's retry logic
    classifies on.

    Reentrancy, release() and the shutdown sweep behave exactly as always for a no-op grant -
    the bookkeeping is real even though the exclusion is not. upgrade_lock() on a no-op READ
    mints the WRITE identity and carries the count across. Semaphores return the unlimited
    sentinel - capping concurrency is meaningless with the services stopped and the tasks
    killed. See rsx:man locks.

    Cache. RsxCache reads return the default (silent miss) and writes are dropped, leaving ONE
    warning line in the Laravel log per process ("maintenance mode: redis write skipped").
    Nothing in the cache is mutated by the window.

    Realtime. publish(), the control-plane refresh pushes and the emitter hash store drop their
    frames (one log line per process), and the subscriber registry reads as EMPTY. This is not
    a convenience: the relay is stopped and redis restarts with an empty registry, so the
    frames are semantically void - and a throw here would abort `migrate` inside an update
    window, since model writes emit at commit through an uncaught chain.

    Stragglers. A process that booted BEFORE enable carries a "no maintenance" snapshot and can
    meet a stopped lock daemon or a stopped redis. Each of the three tolerances re-checks
    is_active_on_disk() on the CONNECT-FAILURE path only (one extra stat, only when something
    already went wrong) and degrades the same way. A refused connection with NO flag on disk
    stays exactly as loud as it has always been - this is a maintenance-gated tolerance, never
    a general softening.

FLAGS
    --reason=<text>   The operator reason (enable only). Defaults to "maintenance mode".
                      It is the flag's content and appears in the web 503 and every refusal.
    --no-services     Touch the flag ONLY - no task kill, no RPC daemon quiesce, no
                      supervisorctl. For containers with no supervisord and for tests.
    --force           (disable only) Leave maintenance mode even though the repository has
                      unresolved conflicts. See THE CONFLICT GUARD ON DISABLE.

RECOVERY
    If a process was killed so violently that the window was never lifted, just run

        php artisan rsx:maintenance:disable

    It is immune to its own gate and idempotent. As an absolute last resort (no working PHP),
    remove the flag file by hand and start the five services yourself:

        rm storage/rsx-framework/.maintenance.mode.framework.update

RSX VS LARAVEL
    Laravel's `php artisan down` / `up` write storage/framework/maintenance.php and gate the
    WEB only. They still exist and still run, but they are HIDDEN from `php artisan list` so
    there is one obvious mechanism. RSpade's maintenance mode additionally: gates the CLI
    (allow-most), kills running background tasks, stops and restarts the runtime services
    including the lock daemon and redis, carries an operator reason through to every message,
    and keeps the framework functional without either of them for the duration.

TROUBLESHOOTING
    "Command not found" for rsx:maintenance:enable
        It is a pre-boot interception in system/artisan, not a Laravel command, so it never
        shows in `php artisan list`. Type it anyway. If artisan reports the script is missing,
        system/bin/maintenance-mode.sh was lost from the framework-owned bin/ zone - restore
        it (a --force pull repairs the zone).

    A task ran anyway during the window
        Only the RUNNERS are gated. A human `rsx:task:run --force` is allowed by design, and a
        task already running when enable fired is killed, not gated. Long-running external
        processes started outside the task system are not affected at all.

    Redis write warnings in the log after maintenance
        One line per process is expected while the window is up (see WHAT CHANGES WHILE
        SERVICES ARE STOPPED). If they continue AFTER disable, redis did not come back - check
        `supervisorctl status`.

    "Cannot reach rsx-lockd" after maintenance
        The lock daemon did not come back. Outside the window there is no degraded mode: every
        cluster lock throws. `supervisorctl status rsx-lockd`, then `php artisan rsx:health`.
        Note that RUNNING is not an answer - rsx:health pings the protocol, which is the only
        thing that distinguishes "serving" from "a process exists".

    "Waiting for rsx-lockd to answer on host:port (Ns)..." during disable
        Working as intended: php-fpm is being held back until the lock daemon serves. If it
        never does, the daemon is the fault to fix - `/var/log/supervisor/rsx-lockd-error.log`
        first. Ctrl-C is safe; the maintenance flag stays raised, so nothing is half-open.

SEE ALSO
    rsx_git, framework_pull_mechanics, rsx_upstream, tasks, locks, caching, realtime

MAINTENANCE_MODE(1)                 RSpade Manual                 MAINTENANCE_MODE(1)
